Not every case in which multiple cancers are found in the same breed is there is a common founder. Rather, in some cases, the same rare cancer is seems to have arisen independently in distinct breeds. Histiocytic cancer covers a broad range of clinical presentations, from benign cutaneous histiocytoma to highly aggressive histiocytic sarcoma (HS) (Affolter and Moore 2000, 2002), which is an aggressive and lethal disorder of dendritic cell origin. Localized HS most commonly develops in the skin or subcutis of an extremity, although it can be found in other organs. Disseminated HS is a multisystem disease with tumors appearing in numerous organs simultaneously.

Both flat-coated retrievers (FCR) and Bernese mountain dogs (BMDs) are at high risk for HS, which affects approximately 20% of FCRs and 25% of BMDs (Abadie et al. 2009; Affolter and Moore 2002; Moore et al. 2006; Proschowsky et al. 2003). BMDs tend to present with a disseminated or visceral form of the disease, generally around age 6 to 7 years, with tumors appearing in the spleen, liver, and lungs (Abadie et al. 2009; Affolter and Moore 2002; Moore et al. 2006; Proschowsky et al. 2003). By comparison, approximately two-thirds of FCRs present with a mass in a joint and/or the surrounding muscle. Earlier literature referred to these as localized and disseminated malignant histiocytosis, respectively (Affolter and Moore 2002). However, they are now more correctly referred to as periarticular and visceral forms (Boerkamp et al. 2013).

The region encompassing MTAP and CDK genes shown to be highly associated with histiocytic sarcoma from (Shearin et al. 2012). A 195-kb region on CFA11 is shown with X-axes for all plots listing SNPs in proximal-distal order. (A) 3 genes are shown with exons indicated as rectangles, introns as lines, and transcripts as arrows. Fisher exact association of HS with allele frequency is plotted along the Y-axis. The light gray line denotes association in a discovery cohort of 24 cases and 20 controls with P values on the right Y-axis. The black line indicates association in the complete cohort after imputation of genotypes (P values on left Y-axis). Horizontal lines depict haplotype association (P values on left Y-axis). (B) Pairwise LD plot with solid blocks indicating D′ = 1 and LOD score of 2. The black outline shows a haplotype block with 28 of 30 equally associated SNPs in this region.

Nearly all human cancer studies are being expanded using HTS in lieu of GWAS-based SNP arrays. HTS provides the ability to detect all variants within the genome rather than focusing on predetermined loci and, as described, obviates the need for later fine-mapping studies. Also, as the importance of rare variation becomes increasingly evident, it can be expected that more and more studies will use HTS rather then GWAS to find the mutation of origin (Cirulli and Goldstein 2010). Finally, the ability to characterize both common and rare structural variation is essential for the study of a complex disease such as cancer, where a considerable component of susceptibility may result from insertion–deletion events, copy number variation (Demichelis et al. 2012) and retrotransposion events (Lee et al. 2012).

Gene expression studies have also been illuminating in the case of HS, where fresh-frozen tissues from FCRs with either periarticular or visceral disease reveal changes in genes from 24 distinct pathways that the authors argue are involved in tumor development. Interestingly, most of the implicated pathways were important in either DNA repair or replication. Nine genes in particular, not previously implicated in HS, including ITGAD, SpiC, VCAM1, PPBP, and ENPEP, were observed to be downregulated in tumors, whereas four others were upregulated (Boerkamp et al. 2013).






